my next stop kenya four and a half
thousand miles from london and a world
away from captive breeding
i'm here to meet another animal family
but a family with a difference
just outside nairobi is a david
sheldrick wildlife trust
orphanage i'm on the milk round
[Music]
yes you're right they're babies bottles
they're just very
big babies bottles
project manager edwin lucicci wanted to
become a priest
twelve years ago he decided to minister
to an entirely different congregation
running for breakfast
somebody's hungry so good it's good it's
good it's good
lift the bottle she's accepted me
now these are all orphan baby elephants
their mothers have
all died they've either been killed or
died of natural causes so they've some
of them had the most appalling start in
life
but they're safe here
most orphans have lost their mums to
poachers supplying the ivory trade
it's still a huge problem and estimates
put the numbers of adults killed as high
as
4 000 a year
but the ambition is not just to keep
these elephants alive it's much greater
than that
the hope is that they can return every
single one of these orphans
to the wild
[Music]
recovery from the trauma is a long
process
as edwin knows only too well
they saw the mothers being killed
they saw their families being separated
from them
and since elephants were a very strong
memory they will remember that for the
rest of the life
[Music]
it's not enough just to provide the
physical care these babies need
some of them are stressed to an extent
that
they can die they can die just from so
much stress
yes they need protection they need care
they need love
and this is what we provide to them
edwin and his team have to become their
family and
earn their trust
in the wild elephants live in family
groups and like our families
they live love and learn surrounded by
others
so the keepers become mum dad auntie
uncle
and most important friends
these babies need 24-hour 365 days a
year
care ow
and they return that love in spades even
to a visitor
like me
[Music]
i know i should have got a haircut but
i'd rather you didn't get it
please by pulling
mutara and i are establishing
what a strong bond mutara is one of the
youngest orphans here she's just seven
months old
and just like human kids she has her own
security blanket
which also keeps her warm bliss
she's gorgeous but the story of her
early life
is absolutely tragic
mutara was found alone by roadside
in northern kenya she was thought to be
just seven days old
her mother was probably killed for her
tusks
and she was so weak she wasn't expected
to survive
here she is seven months on perfectly
healthy
loved and cherished
elephants have a similar life expectancy
to us
in the wild babies aren't weaned until
they're around two years old
and until then they rely totally on
mother's milk
but with no mothers around finding the
right sort of milk was a
massive problem and threatened the whole
program as orphanage founder dame daphne
sheldrick told me
i just can't remember how many died in
my can
we tried this milk we tried that milk we
got um
the analysis of elephants milk from zeus
and that and it was high in fat
and then we tried adding butter cream if
that killed them quicker
and then i tried giving them just skim
milk with no cow's milk fat
and they lived longer but they just
wasted away so then i knew it was a fat
problem and so then i went around
looking for
human baby formulas that had vegetable
oils rather than cow's milk fat
and then we were on the right track
thirty years of research and dedication
paid off the success rate with orphans
has
soared and has paid dividends for matora
who would almost
certainly have died but for the success
of the substitute milk
you must feel that it's been worthwhile
oh you know when you go down there and
you see them all romping around and
growing up and so happy
and normal and you remember how they
were when they came into this
[Applause]
you